It's the 18th of August, 1987. We're in Terry
Kahn's office, and I'm interviewing Sandy
Rosenblum. How do you want your name to appear on
this document? Is it Sandy? No, it's really
Sandra. Sandra. All right. Sandra, you are being
interviewed because you have been on the faculty
here for some time and no one knows what you do.
We think it might be a good idea to get a handle on
your activities. No, I think I've done just fine
without anyone knowing what I was doing. Well,
you're rarely here. You're usually in circuit
somewhere. That's not quite true. So in terms of
the history of planning education in Texas, we're
here to record your role. I think the biggest role I
have is that there's so many of my students that I
share with everybody else. Obviously, they're
not uniquely my students. Well, let's go back to
the beginning. What was your background before
you came to UK? I had a degree in political science,
but between my master's degree and my doctorate, I
dropped out. I don't think dropped out is the right
word. I had not intended to go on for a PhD, and I went
to work for a systems analysis firm in Santa
Barbara. They had just gotten Charlie Har with
secretary of HUD, or undersecretary of HUD. It was
the end of the Johnson era, and there was a feeling
that urban would have been successful. There was
all sorts of space technology, and there was a
feeling that the space technology could be
applied to urban systems. And so for basically,
you know, I used to call them World War III systems
analysis firms that kind of did a lot of work for
defense departments. We're giving fairly large
grants. to look at urban transportation
problems. And the firm that I went to work for had
nobody there who was not a World War III type. And
they moseyed down to UCLA and put up an ad, and I
interviewed, and I went to work for them. And I
worked for them for a couple of years. No, you did
your doctoral work at UCLA. At UCLA. All three of my
degrees are from UCLA. Who did you study with? John
Jack Bowens, who is an expert on local government,
especially district government. Also, I did some
work and was a TA for Fran Rabinowitz.
She's done a lot of things in her career. She's a
professor now at SC, and she's going to be here.
She's going to be the main speaker for the APA, the
Texas Chapter APA Conference.
Mostly, I always focused on local government, so
the fact that I didn't have a planning degree was
not and I'm here is not totally surprising. I
always was interested in local government and
local planning issues, even though I wasn't in a
planning school. I got my master's in public
administration, MPA,
and then I went out into the workforce.
I quickly, I knew nothing much about
transportation, but I was the only urban person on
the team under this contract. And our contract
monitor at HUD was Leon Cole. Uh-huh. The plot
thickens. The plot thickens. I did some real
interesting work there. Mostly I was a gopher when
I was young. I was by far the most junior person on
the project. The piece of work that I cut out, or
that was cut out for me, was to look at the taxi
industry and the economic structure of the taxi
industry. And it turned out I was the first person
who'd ever done that. We did a survey, and I put
together all this information. And I wasn't quite
sure what to make out of all of it, but that was the
start. I wrote a couple of articles then while
still at this firm. What was the name of that firm?
The firm was then called General Research
Corporation and it's now changed its name to
something else. And they're back doing, I think,
largely World War III stuff. They tried the urban
stuff for four or five years and had a subsidiary
that went off and did a lot of police work. But two
things happened in the end of 1970, 1969. One was
Let me do that later. But one was that UCLA called me
and asked me if I had been interested in doing a
doctoral degree because they had a traffic
safety, 10 traffic safety fellowships from then.
The US Department of Health, HEW then. And they
couldn't find enough people. Nobody wanted to
take a traffic safety fellowship. And the
requirements were not on us at all. And it was a lot
of money. So in the end of the 60s, it was $3,000 plus
tuition. And all you had to do was take one traffic
safety course a year. It was not exactly a terrible
thing. So I had been putting that off, putting it
off. I had been thinking sort of about going back
for a doctor. This came through. At the same time,
the firm I was with got a contract in Watts in East
Los Angeles. to do, it was right after the Watts
riots, to do a major study of their transportation
needs. These two incidents were obviously very
fortuitous. I went back to UCLA with the grant and
the job, had a wonderful time, became, quote, a
transportation expert. And when I was finishing
up, my old boss at this firm called Leon Cole and
said, or came to me and said, Leon Cole's putting
together a program in Texas. Would you be
interested? And they interviewed me, etc., etc. I
came down for the practice, to practice anything.
I mean, I couldn't imagine. My mother and father
had been here during the war, and my mother had
horrible stories about Texas, Paris, Texas. And I
came down, of course, fell in love with Austin. And
I was offered the job. I took it. What year was that?
It was the spring of 72. I was offered the job. I came
here in the fall, September of 72. Mm-hmm. And what
have you been doing since? Well, I'm not sure I'm
not going to edit this out of the tape, but I did not
come with my dissertation. I was ABD, and I screwed
around for three years. It wasn't that I screwed
around so much. For example, Leon left like ten
months later, and he had a big contract. Well, at
that time it was big, I don't know, $10,000 or
$15,000 from the college coordinating board to do
something about transportation. He hadn't done a
thing, and he hadn't spent much of the money
either, so I got that grant. And I used it to study
something that I had gotten very interested in,
which was low capital measures to deal with
traffic congestion, traffic congestion in
cities, not focusing on all sorts of planning
issues as opposed to signalization and traffic
lights and curbs and gutters, looking at land use
and transit and bus lanes and how that would affect
it. Subsequently, I bid on and won a very large
grant In the end it was about a quarter of a million
dollars over three years from the National
Cooperative Highway Research Program of the
National Research Council of the National
Academy of Sciences to do a major study all across
the United States of these same kind of more
socially based traffic control measures. And for
a long time I did that and then I got back into doing
the stuff I had done when I had been with this
company which was looking at the role of the taxi,
which by this time had come to be called
paratransit. And that became about mid-70s that
flared up again. I did a lot of work from the
National Academy putting together conferences
on paratransit. Wrote a lot on that. Segwayed from
there into doing a lot of stuff on the elderly and
handicapped, because though it's not commonly
known, the elderly and the disadvantaged are the
major customers of taxes. And it's pretty, in many
cases, it's evenly divided between very rich
people and very poor people. It's people who don't
have cars. And the majority of people who don't
have cars are either business people in some other
city who don't have their own car, or poor people in
their own city who don't have their own car. And so I
think through the decade of the 70s, I became... I
think one of the country's leading experts on the
elderly and handicapped and our paratransit
notes. I haven't kept up as much on the traffic
congestion stuff. In part, I do some, but not a lot.
Then in the early 80s, I got real interested in the
impact of the demographic changes in society on
transportation, particularly to workers and the
working wife, and even more than that, the working
mother, which has just been The incredible social
change of this generation, this century really,
is not just the number of women in the workforce,
it's the number of women and young children who are
in the workforce. I know it's astonishing, and
this society is just not ready for it. It needs the
workers. It clearly needs those women and the jobs
they do, but it is absolutely not structured to
respond to their needs. We talk about valuing the
family, and even feminists are rediscovering the
family. and I sort of agree with Betty for Dan a
little bit, that the feminists, they
concentrated upper-middle-class women and
forgot about the rest of everybody, and they
concentrated women that didn't have children and
whose children were already grown. But every
country in the world, whether they're socialist
or right-wing, some of them try to actively
prevent women from entering the labor force
because of social or cultural reasons, but those
that allow women in the labor force recognize that
it's important for the family that you provide
proper child care and family support. So it's not
just true of the Scandinavian countries. We hear a
lot about it. It's true of every country I've ever
dealt with. People realize that children are
their future resource. And whether you want women
working or you don't want women working, you
realize that if they go out to work, you have to do
something about your children, and you have to do
At a minimum, you have to do something about their
children. And better, you have to have all kinds of
maternity and maternity policies, and you have to
have family leave policies and part-time work.
And this society is absolutely not responsive.
Obviously, I can't deal with all that. What I've
tended to deal with in the last five or six years is
transportation. How well, what kind, all these
new travel patterns, all these new work patterns,
clearly must create new travel patterns. And
leisure patterns. Exactly. And how do we respond?
How does the transportation planning process
respond to them? That's what I wanted to look at.
And first I started from a much more technical
view, and I really resisted the easy psychology of
the day or Life magazine kind of approach to, you
know, Time magazine just did a thing on child care.
I mean, real tripping light kind of stuff. No, I
really tried to focus in on what transportation
planning models entailed how they dealt with the
employment of women and the employment of women
with children, how they dealt with how a household
divided responsibilities and how that might
impact travel patterns. If you know anything
about it, you discover that none of the models that
anybody uses is at all responsive. Lately, I've
gone away from being so concerned with what
modelers do, because you really have to be fairly
sophisticated in a very technical way to
understand what's in a model, and nobody cares.
And I've been addressing the larger policy
issues. In the early 70s, then, when I first got
interested in this, I wrote a grant to the German
Marshall Fund of the United States. And with
support from, you know, you just halfway luck into
these things, and it's an idea whose time has come,
with support from the Dutch government and the
French government, I got this grant, I did a survey
here in the United States, I did a survey, the
French government did it for me, but it was the same
survey in Lyon, France, and the Dutch government
did it in Rotterdam, so we have, you know, small
scale, 200 families, maybe 50 families in each
place, but very detailed questions about what
they did with their kids, and how they've impacted
their travel behavior, and how their household
responsibilities.
And subsequent to the German Marshall Fund, I had a
National Science Foundation NSF grant. I had,
allied with that, CNRS, which is the French
equivalent. It was a joint grant from the French
NSF and our NSF. Then I had a Rockefeller grant.
I've had some university research grants, so I've
been funded on this now going on five years.
Funding runs out right about now, and I have a
couple of flyers in the iron. I'm not real worried
because I think it's such a sexy topic, if I can use
that word, that I think there's more money in it. Do
you get paid a salary as well? Oh, no, of course not.
No, but I do get to go live in France. I live in the
8283. I live in France almost a year, a community
between France and Holland.
I've spent the last five summers for two or three
months in my apartment in Paris. It's the first
year since 1982 that I have not been in Paris for the
summer. Maybe that's why I got the impression that
you're here next. I'm here in the semester
usually. See, 82, 83, I was not. I was off, so I was in
Paris. What courses do you normally attend? I
don't teach any transportation courses much
anymore because there's not as much demand as you
might think. There's always a few people who are
really interested, but not enough to sustain...
There are a lot of jobs in transportation. Oh,
that's the only reason I think I get some of the
students. What I've noticed is, and again, I'm not
sure I'm going to do this in the record, the best
students are not particularly interested in
transportation. And quite often, I get the worst
students. Oh, dear. Yeah, there's tons of jobs.
People call me all the time looking for jobs. I can
place anybody a job tomorrow afternoon. Not
necessarily in Austin. No, no. But that's been our
experience today, I know. No, no. It's definitely
true. But they're still not interested. And the
reason is, I've had a lot of time to think about
this, and a lot of educators and I have talked about
it. I think it's not technical enough for
engineers. I mean, there are technical
components in the modeling stuff. But that's not
technical enough for engineers, so it's not held
very high in the engineering and the CE
department. They have their problems filling
their transportation courses, too, in CE all
across the country. And in planning schools, it's
too technical. It's too quantitative. You have to
understand too many quantitative kinds of
things. And the people who are drawn from the
social sciences to transportation are drawn
often to the idea of a rail system, in which I don't
believe, in which most academics don't believe.
In any case, when they discover there's no easy
answers and it might be to deal with the
transportation problems in the city, you might
have to do 27 different things from carpools to bus
lanes to... a lot of people turn right and red
lights to it. You know, also, I mean, you have to
have a whole sort of package of viable options, and
you have to approach everything. Americans in
general, you know, want a simple solution, and
they discover the rail system quickly, a quick,
simple solution. The rail system is probably not
the answer, and even if it would solve some of the
problems, it wouldn't solve a whole bunch of other
problems. A lot of people come in thinking that
rail systems are the answer to the problems of poor
people or handicapped people, and then they're
shocked to realize that You know, that that's not
true at all in New York or Chicago or Atlanta or any
of those places. And so when the quick answer goes
away, a lot of them lose interest. Plus, on top of
that, they have to learn all this complicated
modeling stuff. And of course, this is not a
program like MIT or Northwestern. You don't end up
having to do a lot of modeling. When Alan was here,
he taught some here. Mostly we ship our students
over to the CE department to take the modeling
stuff. But if you have to count anything, do any
equations at all, and they've already lost the
charisma of the subject is gone. So I rarely teach
transportation courses. What I do teach is three
out of the five or six required courses in the
program. I do that because for many years I did not.
All through the 70s, I taught only seminars when I
wanted to. I saw very few of the students. There's
hundreds of students, probably more than
hundreds, who went through this program without
ever taking a course with me. What courses do you
teach now? Now I teach Introduction to Planning,
which is some planning history, some planning
theory. It's very much a skills course, writing
skills, graphic skills. I co-teach that with
Peter Koltman, who of course has the graphic
skills. I teach the computer part, I teach the
writing part, I teach some of the history. Peter
and I share the history. And we sort of cover
everything, sort of introduction to everything,
library use. Also, I teach financing public
services, which is about a third of the
microeconomics course and then the traditional
public finance course. I also teach, in the
spring, I teach planning methods,
which is all of the population projection
methods, the regional economic methods.
forecasting and so forth. Well, that's quite a
lot. And computer stuff, yeah. And then in the
spring, I usually also teach one of my seminars. In
the last couple of years, I've taught the seminar
either on single parents, or this summer, for
example, I taught the seminar on the problems of
women alone at three times in their life, the
displaced housewife, the elderly widow, and the
single woman with children. And it was a small
course, five or six, but very successful. And I'm
enjoying it. I enjoy that. For a long time, I
wouldn't even teach my research stuff in my
seminars, because I felt that there's so much else
to cover. And I think that was a big mistake,
because I have an enthusiasm about, everybody has
enthusiasm about their research that they don't
necessarily have about their planning efforts.
I'm the person in this program who's largely
responsible for our emphasis on writing skills.
Dowell Myers was here, and I I went off to a seminar
at MIT, taught by Louise Dunlap in
1980-something. Other people still talk about
it. I got into new writing pedagogy, which you may
know something about. You don't write outlines,
because writing is thinking. And you legitimize
the thinking process, and you say, OK, at some
point, you have to stop and revise, and the hard
work comes from revising. So you have to teach
revising skills, and you have to legitimate
thinking and writing, because that's the way
people do it. Writing is hard work, it's practice.
Nobody was born being a good writer. Some people
have higher skill levels, but the way you get
better is to practice and write over and over and
over and over and over again. You don't have to
worry about your audience and all of that. So I've
been writing with numbers. I've been very,
very... forceful in that. My other colleagues can
recognize it, and they tell me all the time that
they can see it. The negative part, they can see
improvement in student writing. I mean, there's
no doubt at all. In two years, and it's not just me,
of course. Obviously, the other faculty members
have had input. But because I teach so many of the
required courses, and because I stress this all
the time, stress what things look like ever since
the Macintosh has come along. Graphics have to be
good looking. Things have to look good, as well as
the content. If they look at it, there's a chance
they might work well. Well, it's a possibility
with both. What I've noticed in my years is that
People are real busy out in the real world, and they
don't have a lot of time, and they make snap judges,
and they do judge a book by its cover, and all of that
sort of thing. And it's not fair, and students tell
me it's not fair. They tell me it's not fair to grade
that way, and it's not fair that the world works
that way. But in point of fact, I have seen junk
proposals. I've been on National Academy of
Science committees who are the worst, not the
worst, but certainly far from the best proposal
won, because it was good looking, it was printed as
opposed to Xerox, they had colored paper. there's
nothing there avoided it look good a lot of flash so
i think you got to teach flash and substance at the
same time and you know my fellow faculty see it
because the papers get better and better looking
and it's much slower they get better and better in
terms of content and the neck the downside of it is
it takes an incredible amount of time and there's a
lot of students and typically to begin with Later,
often they come back and say, I'm glad you did that.
And I've had them cycling through for the last five
years, once they've been out in the workforce,
coming back and saying, oh, that's the best thing.
I'm so glad you did that. But when you're doing it to
them, a lot of them have gone all the way through
undergraduate school without ever writing an
essay or doing anything but taking
machine-graded tests. And they've forgotten
how. So it's troublesome. Well, I've worked with
some of the people at UT Arlington and the Urban
Studies Center, and I think they do some nice work.
They're real aggressive, and they're an urban
area, a real urban area, and I think they look... I
haven't seen a lot of work from them, but what I've
seen, I think it's first rate. They did some stuff
on interlocal cooperation contracts between
governments. They did some work, and they let me
use their database on private contracting by...
by local governments. In terms of what they're
teaching, I have to confess I don't know. I only
know them as, in that limited capacity, seeing
them at APA meetings and knowing some of their
work, which their work I find fine. I think I have a
better feeling about what goes on at AAM, though
you may not think so. I think I have a good sense of
Well, I think I have a sense of what you teach, and it
seems to me that in certain areas you're far better
than anyone in the state, and that is in areas of
land use, traditional planning, and history. You
have real strength there, a real strong
commitment to that. Students come out really
knowing what they're doing. My impression is that
If you come out with a master's from A&M, you can
walk right in and take the AICP and pass it. I don't
mean an exaggeration, but I think you actually
have a higher success rate. Well, you may not have a
higher success rate than our students, but I think
fewer of our students take it. So I think if as many
of our students took it as yours take it, I think
that you would have a higher pass rate. I think
you're more geared toward that. Of course, we have
it. Also,
I know a lot about that
various faculty members make an active practice
of going to communities and doing field work
studies, doing studies for communities. I don't
know. I must confess, whether you get paid for
them, or you go out and seek a client, or you just do
them, I don't know. I mean, often I even know from
somebody on the faculty that somebody's doing a
study like that, or I'm in some small community or
something, and I hear that, yeah, I need something
there, and we've done that. So I get a real sense of
public service and real field work training for
the students. There is a lot of that. In fact, I
think almost too much. Well, maybe. That's
possible. See, I don't know. I would prefer to see
it more academically. Well, now, I don't know.
It's hard to say. I would say that makes you a little
more narrow than we are. But certainly in the area
that you're strong, you're really strong. And
traditionally, that's been good material for
first jobs. Our students agitated us to do more of
that. And it's not my particular interest. I'm not
saying I necessarily disagree with it. But I'm not
going to turn into a land use and zoning person
tomorrow. You know, I do think if one of our
students is competing with one of your students
for an entry-level job, our student is in a
disadvantage. On the other hand, I think that's
what it looks like in paper. I'm not sure that we
don't challenge... with the academic stuff, that
we don't challenge the students so that over the
long run they may have... they may be more
responsive to less structured situations. When
you're an entry-level person, you're in a very
structured situation. What I try to tell students
is... Sure, you should have a set of skills that get
you a nice first-level job, okay? But things
change. The computers you're learning today,
five years from now, are going to be outdated.
Somebody's going to invent something else. I
mean, you can't... If you want to stay a computer
person, okay, then no, you're going to have to keep
up that way. Otherwise, take it... You have the
advantage of lots of schools don't put you out as
computer literate as we do. Go out, fly with that,
find out what you want to do, and then use your other
skills, your thinking, your analytical skills,
you know, to develop and to get somewhere. I
remember when there was a great push for all
planets to learn Fortran. Yeah. And I resisted
that like crazy, and I... very happy I did. Well,
interestingly, I went back and learned Pascal
last year. And I'm glad I did because I learned it in
a very superficial way. And I'm glad I did because I
understand a lot of things about SAS and SPSS,
about the computer programs. But in general, I
would say probably right now, not more than 10% of
our students ever touch a mainframe. and maybe
less will over time, because now we have SPSS and
SAS running on the micros, and the micros have
horrendous memory. On the other hand, I think that
if you go out and you don't know how to run a micro,
you should have been taught that. That's very
different from Fortran. I mean, micros are like
typewriters, or maps. I mean, they're part of the
technical skill toolkit that you have to have when
you go out into the real world. And it's very true to
me that some of our students have been hired solely
on those grounds. Now, that's fine. You know, what
I say to them is you've got to make sure that you
don't get stuck being the computer person when you
really want to be a planner. And we have a couple of
students, one who's resisted. I think he's, I'm
not sure, but I think he's just gone to work for the
county. he's just a computer whiz and he put our
whole lab together and he's made money over the
last year since he's graduated big money doing
computing consulting so what he wants to do he
wants to be a planner and he wants to use the
computer but he doesn't want to be the computer
whiz and so he's turned down a number of jobs where
he would have that either had nothing to do with
planning or where he would simply be the computer
hack for people so that's difficult and i'm But in
that sense, he sees firmly what the problem is. And
if you're too good at that, then they'll take away
the planning, the substantive stuff. So you have
to watch that. Hopefully we're training people
who can deal with the substance as well as some of
the
preference. Mm-hmm. Good.